# Master_Project
Estimating Physical Stellar Parameters from High Resolution Spectra with a Deep Learning Regression Approach


# Objective
The objective of this Master’s Thesis is to evaluate the capabilities of Deep Learning with a Regression approach on estimating physical stellar parameters from spectra. 

# Introduction
The first evidence of a planet outside our own solar system, i.e. exoplanet, was found as early as 1917 [1]. However, the findings were so ahead of their time that they were not recognised as such for a century to come. Thus, the first scientific confirmed detection came in 1992 when A. Wolszczan and  D. A. Frail used a radio telescope to detect two planet-sized bodies orbiting a pulsar [2]. 

One can argue that the discovery increased the interest in the field both among scientist as well as the public. This was later indirectly confirmed with a huge investment in the Kepler Mission, where a telescope was sent into orbit in 2009 to discover Earth-size planets orbiting distant stars [3]. The exoplanet discovery rate has increased steadily over time since the first findings, leading to a total of  3774 confirmed exoplanets as of August 8th 2018 [4]. 

Humanity has taken great leaps forwards since the time when Galileo Galilei was put into life time house arrest for strongly arguing in favour for the Copernican model. However, the holy grail in astronomy, and arguably in any other field, would be the discovery of life on another planet. For life as we know it, water is an absolute necessity. Astronomers are therefore searching the cosmos for similar planets with similar conditions as our own. Although scientists’ understanding of what makes up a habitable zone continues to evolve, it can generally be depicted as a band not too close nor too far away from the host star, where liquid water can be found. See Figure 1.1 below. As stars and planets come in many types and sizes, the interplay between those factors defines the characteristics of the habitable zone. If we stick to the idea of “looking for something we already know”, then small, Earth-sized rocky planets would be our best bet to find life [5]. 

Not only is the size and composition of the stars and planets critical to hold life, but so is time. Giant bright stars burn out within a few million years while smaller dwarfs, as our own Sun, can produce a steady shine for billions of years. It might be enough with a few hundred million years for microscopical single-celled life to form. Reasoning from what we know about life on Earth though, it’s most likely a far too short time frame for advanced life forms, such as our own, to evolve. 
Based on conservative measurements of small portions of the sky and extrapolating, there are around 100 billion stars in our Milky Way galaxy [6]. Recent statistical calculations estimate that there is, at least, one planet orbiting each star in the galaxy [4]. With the same method, it can be estimated that there are around 10 billion galaxies in the observed universe, yielding some 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000, or 1023, planets to search.

Most of the exoplanet searches have been conducted on G-type Sun stars. See Figure 1.2 for Star Spectral Classification. Despite M-type stars being the most common star type in the galaxy and that searches around these stars have proven successful, they haven’t been as extensive as around K, G and F stars. The main reason for this is their faintness in the optical, where most of the radial velocity (RV) searches are being performed [7] [8]. Since no surveys on high-resolution near-infrared spectrograph dedicated to planet search existed, the CARMENES study was initiated. 

CARMENES (Calar Alto high-Resolution search for M dwarfs with Exoearths with Near-infrared and optical Échelle Spectrographs) is a Spanish-German consortium project between 11 different organisations. Among these are the Complutense University of Madrid, the Max-Planch-Institute in Heidelberg, Germany, and the Calar Alto Astronomical Observatory in Almería, Spain [9]. The project is targeting some 300 M dwarfs with the main scientific goal of detecting Earth-sized planets (2 M_Earth< M_(New planet)< 5 M_Earth) in the habitable zone of the host star. Cool dwarfs are targeted where the habitable zone lies closer to the star. The research conducted will thus provide a comprehensive overview of planetary systems orbiting M-type stars in the northern celestial hemisphere, where follow-up studies can further investigate their habitability [10]. 

To better understand a star and its possible exoplanets, it is of importance to determine several physical parameters such as effective temperature, surface gravity and metallicity. By using high resolution data obtained from the CARMENES study, and a synthetical BT-Settl dataset generated by a model, spectrograms can be created. As the BT-Settl data comes with physical parameters unique for the modelled stars, Deep Learning algorithms can be applied to analyse the spectrograms for patterns, ideally making it possible to predict the stars’ parameters. Earlier research has attempted to determine these parameters using other Machine Learning algorithms [11]. However, the use of Deep Learning algorithms might also contribute to such goal, and thus, this project is an exploratory analysis regarding the feasibility of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) in the field.

The Deep Learning techniques employed in this Master’s Thesis are applicable in a wide set of sectors and systems, covering Business Intelligence (BI), Management Systems, Decision Making Systems etc. etc., where these algorithms increasingly have been implemented for their capacity to process and analyse vast amounts of data. By finding patterns previous methods weren’t capable of and making predictive and normative suggestions, they have become the foundation in the BI sector [12]. Through minor or no adjustments, the very same methods can be applied on a wide set of fields. As a manager or decision maker in the 21th century, it will be ever increasingly important to have an understanding of their potentiality. 

